
# Stability service

@@TODO: Esteban this section?


## Component description

@@brief description

See also:
* (D4.2)
* (other links)


## Usability study

@@links to supporting documentation??


### User perspective

@@description of end-user facing usability

@@cover visualization or ensure it is covered inother deliverables.  Cross-ref?


#### Survey

@@TODO: as appropriate, replace "N/A" or TODO by appropriate survey responses

##### General usability:

* Visibility of system status. Does it give users appropriate feedback within reasonable time?
    * Yes. The results appear in a negligible amount of time, providing the needed feedback to the user.
* Match between system and the real world. Does it speak the user’s language and make information appear in a natural and logical order? Are implementation-specific details hidden from the user?
    * Yes. The usage of graphs makes the information understandable. Some concepts may require contextual knowledge but are presented in user's language.
* User control and freedom. Does it provide clearly marked exits, undo and redo?
    * Yes. The undo and redo are not needed in this application, but navigation is very intuitive.
* Consistency and standards. Is it consistent within the software, with other similar packages and with platform conventions?
    * Yes. The languange, interaction with other applications and style are aligned with the project standards.
* Error prevention. Does it prevent errors in the first place or help users avoid making them?
    * Yes. The application presents a set of information that doesn't allow users make errors. In case something could happen a message would appear in order to help users.
* Recognition rather than recall. Does it make objects, actions and options visible and reduce the amount of information a user has to remember?
    * Yes. The display and interface is clean and simple.
* Flexibility and efficiency of use. Does it offer short-cuts and support macros for frequently- done action sequences?
    * No. They are not needed.
* Aesthetic and minimalist design. Does it avoid showing irrelevant or rarely-needed information?
    * Yes. Only the needed information is visible.
* Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors. Does it make errors clear, comprehensible, precise and suggest solutions if possible?
    * Yes. Errors are clear, but as it is an informative application the recoverability is not needed.
* Help and documentation. Does it provide concise, accurate, clear, easily-searchable task- oriented doc centred around concrete lists of steps?
    * Yes. There is information on the project main webpage and project wiki.
* Robustness.  Are responses sensible when instructions are not followed; e.g., wrong commands, illegal values, etc.?
    * Yes. The only possible of error is the retrieval of an inexistent Research Object, and a message would appear to inform about that.
* Obviousness. Can tasks be accomplished without any consultation of user documents or other material?
    * Yes. Everything can be used, but a introduction to the concepts would be necessary to understand the meaning of the presented results.

##### Release packaging:

* Are the binary releases packaged for immediate use in a suitable archive format?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear how to get the software from the web site? Does it have version numbers?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear from the web site or user doc what other packages are required?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear what the licencing and copyright is on the web site?
    * @@TODO
* How to get started.  Is there a README, FAQ?
    * @@TODO

##### User documentation:

* Are thererelevant user documents?
    * @@TODO (links)
* Is the user documentation accurate?
    * @@TODO
* Does it partition user, user-developer and developer information or mix it all together?
    * @@TODO
* Is the user doc online?
    * @@TODO
* Are there any supporting tutorials?
    * @@TODO
* If so, do these list the versions they apply to?
    * N/A
* If so, are they task-oriented, structured around helping users achieve their tasks?
    * N/A

##### Help and support:

* Is there a list of known bugs and issues, or a bug/issue tracker?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear how to ask for help e.g. where to e-mail or how to enter bugs/issues
    * @@TODO
* Are there e-mail list archives or forums?
    * @@TODO
* If so, is there evidence of use?
    * N/A
* Are they searchable?
    * N/A
* Is there a bug/issue tracker?
    * @@TODO
* If so, there evidence of use?
    * N/A
* If so, does it seem that bugs and issues are resolved or, at least, looked at?
    * N/A
* Is it clear what quality of service a user expect in terms of support e.g. best effort, reasonable effort, reply in 24 hours etc.?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear how to contribute bugs, issues, corrections (e.g. in tutorials or user doc) or ideas?
    * @@TODO


### User-developer perspective

@@TODO: describe user-developer capabilities and interface

#### Survey

* How easy is it to set up development environment to write code that uses the software or service?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear what third-party tools and software you need, which versions you need, where to get these and how to set them up?
    * @@TODO
* Are there tutorials available for user-developers?
    * @@TODO
* If so, Do these list the versions they apply to? Are they accurate, and understandable?
    * N/A
* Is there example code that can be compiled, customised and used?
    * @@TODO
* How accurate, understandable and complete is the API documentation? Does it provide
examples of use?
    * @@TODO
* For services, is there information about quality of service? e.g. number of requests that can be run in a specific time period. How do user-developers find out when services might be down etc.
    * @@TODO
* For services, is there information about copyright and licencing as to how the services can be used? e.g. for non-commercial purposes only, does the project have to be credited etc. Is there information on how any data can be used, who owns it etc.?
    * @@TODO
* Is the copyright and licencing of the software and third-party dependencies clear and documented so you can understand the implications on extensions you write?
    * @@TODO


### Developer perspective

@@Briefly describe the nature of the codebase, language used and development practices

@@Link to component web page for developers


#### Survey

* How easy is it to set up development environment to change the software?
    * @@TODO
* How easy is it to access to up-to-date versions of the source code that reflect changes made since the last release? i.e. access to the source code repository.
    * @@TODO
* How easy is it to understand the structure of the source code repository? Is there information that relates the structure of the source code to the software’s architecture?
    * @@TODO
* Is it clear what third-party tools and software you need, which versions you need, where to get these and how to set them up?
    * @@TODO
* How easy is it to compile the code?
    * @@TODO
* How easy is it to build a release bundle or deploy a service?
    * @@TODO
* How easy is it to validate changes you’ve made? This includes building the software, getting, building and running tests.
    * @@TODO
* Is there design documentation available? How accurate and understandable is it?
    * @@TODO
* Are there tutorials available for developers?
    * @@TODO
* If so, are they accurate, and understandable?
    * @@TODO
* How readable is the source code?  Well-laid out with good use of white-space and
indentation?
    * @@TODO
* How accurate or comprehensive is the source code commenting?  Does it focus on why the code is as it is?
    * @@TODO


## Benchmarking

### Capabilities

@@TODO - describe evaluation and result


### Performance

@@TODO - describe evaluation and result


## Sustainability and maintainability

@@TODO: brief background information from developer perspective, focusing on access, support and communication

### Survey

**Identity:**

To what extent is the identity of the project/software clear and unique both within its application domain and generally?

* Project/software has its own domain name.
    * @@TODO
* Project/software has a logo.
    * @@TODO
* Project/software has a distinct name within its application area. A search by Google on the name plus keywords from the application area throws up the project web site in the first page of matches.
    * @@TODO
* Project/software has a distinct name regardless of its application area. A search by Google on the name plus keywords from the application area throws up the project web site in the first page of matches.
    * @@TODO
* Project/software name does not throw up embarrassing “did you mean...” hits on Google.
    * @@TODO
* Project/software name does not violate an existing trade-mark.
    * @@TODO
* Project/software name is trade-marked.
    * @@TODO


**Copyright:**

To what extent is it clear who wrote the software and owns its copyright?

* Web site states copyright.
    * @@TODO
* Web site states who developed/develops the software, funders etc.
    * @@TODO
* If there are multiple web sites then these all state exactly the same copyright, licencing and authorship.
    * @@TODO
* Each source code file has a copyright statement.
    * @@TODO
* If supported by the language, each source code file has a copyright statement embedded within a constant.
    * @@TODO


**Licencing:**

Has an appropriate licence been adopted?

* Web site states licence.
    * @@TODO
* Software (source and binaries) has a licence.
    * @@TODO
* Software has an open source licence.
    * @@TODO
* Software has an Open Software Initiative (OSI) recognised licence ([http://www.opensource.org/]()).
    * @@TODO
* Each source code file has a licence header.
    * @@TODO


**Governance:**

To what extent does the project make its management, or how its software development is managed, transparent?

* Project has defined a governance policy.
    * @@TODO
* Governance policy is publicly available.
    * @@TODO


**Community:**

To what extent does/will an active user community exist for this product?

* Web site has statement of number of users/developers/members.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has success stories.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has quotes from satisfied users.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has list of important partners or collaborators.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has list of the project’s publications.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has list of third-party publications that cite the software.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has list of software that uses/bundles this software.
    * @@TODO
* Users are requested to cite the project if publishing papers based on results derived from the software.
    * @@TODO
* Users are required to cite a boilerplate citation if publishing papers based on results derived from the software.
    * @@TODO
* Users exist who are not members of the project.
    * @@TODO
* Developers exist who are not members of the project.
    * @@TODO


**Availability:**

To what extent is the software available? (The SSI evaluation uses "accessible" for this quality, but that has been changed here to avoid confusion with other uses of "accessibility")

* Binary distributions are available (whether for free, payment, registration).
    * @@TODO
* Binary distributions are freely available.
    * @@TODO
* Binary distributions are available without the need for any registration or authorisation of access by the project.
    * @@TODO
* Source distributions are available (whether for free, payment, registration).
    * @@TODO
* Source distributions are freely available.
    * @@TODO
* Source distributions are available without the need for any registration or authorisation of access by the project.
    * @@TODO
* Access to source code repository is available (whether for free, payment, registration).
    * @@TODO
* Anonymous read-only access to source code repository.
    * @@TODO
* Ability to browse source code repository online.
    * @@TODO
* Repository is hosted externally to a single organisation/institution in a sustainable third- party repository (e.g. SourceForge, GoogleCode, LaunchPad, GitHub) which will live beyond the lifetime of any current funding line.
    * @@TODO
* Downloads page shows evidence of regular releases (e.g. six monthly, bi-weekly, etc.).
    * @@TODO


**Testability:**

How straightforward is it to test the software to verify modifications?

* Project has unit tests.
    * @@TODO
* Project has integration tests.
    * @@TODO
* For GUIs, project uses automated GUI test frameworks.
    * @@TODO
* Project has scripts for testing scenarios that have not been automated (e.g. for testing GUIs).
    * @@TODO
* Project recommends tools to check conformance to coding standards.
    * @@TODO
* Project has automated tests to check conformance to coding standards.
    * @@TODO
* Project recommends tools to check test coverage.
    * @@TODO
* Project has automated tests to check test coverage.
    * @@TODO
* A minimum test coverage level that must be met has been defined.
    * @@TODO
* There is an automated test for this minimum test coverage level.
    * @@TODO
* Tests are automatically run nightly.
    * @@TODO
* Continuous integration is supported – tests are automatically run whenever the source code changes.
    * @@TODO
* Test results are visible to all developers/members.
    * @@TODO
* Test results are visible publicly.
    * @@TODO
* Test results are e-mailed to a mailing list.
    * @@TODO
* This e-mailing list can be subscribed to by anyone.
    * @@TODO
* Project specifies how to set up external resources e.g. FTP servers, databases for tests.
    * @@TODO
* Tests create their own files, database tables etc.
    * @@TODO


**Portability:**

To what extent can the software be used on other platforms?

* Application can be built on and run under Windows.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Windows 7.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Windows XP.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Windows Vista.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under UNIX/Linux.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Solaris.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under RedHat.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Debian.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Fedora.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under Ubuntu.
    * @@TODO
* Application can be built on and run under MacOSX.
    * @@TODO
* Browser applications run under Internet Explorer.
    * @@TODO
* Browser applications run under Mozilla Firefox.
    * @@TODO
* Browser applications run under Google Chrome.
    * @@TODO
* Browser applications run under Opera.
    * @@TODO
* Browser applications run under Safari.
    * @@TODO


**Supportability:**

To what extent will the product be supported currently and in the future?

* Web site has page describing how to get support.
    * @@TODO
* User doc has page describing how to get support.
    * @@TODO
* Software describes how to get support (in a README for command-line tools or a Help=>About window in a GUI).
    * @@TODO
* Above pages/windows/files describe, or link to, a description of “how to ask for help” e.g. cite version number, send transcript, error logs etc.
    * @@TODO
* Project has an e-mail address.
    * @@TODO
* Project e-mail address has project domain name.
    * @@TODO
* E-mails are read by more than one person.
    * @@TODO
* E-mails are archived.
    * @@TODO
* E-mail archives are publicly readable.
    * @@TODO
* E-mail archives are searchable.
    * @@TODO
* Project has a ticketing system.
    * @@TODO
* Ticketing system is publicly readable.
    * @@TODO
* Ticketing system is searchable.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has site map or index.
    * @@TODO
* Web site has search facility.
    * @@TODO
* Project resources are hosted externally to a single organisation/institution in a sustainbable e-mail   archives or ticketing system shows that queries are responded to within a week (not necessarily fixed, but at least looked at and a decision taken as to their priority).
    * @@TODO
* If there is a blog, is it is regularly used.
    * @@TODO
* E-mail lists or forums, if present, have regular posts.
    * @@TODO


**Analysability:**

How straightforward is it to analyse the software’s source release to:
(a) To understand its implementation architecture?
(b) To understand individual source code files and how they fit into the implementation architecture?


* Source code is structured into modules or packages.
    * @@TODO
* Source code structure relates clearly to the architecture or design.
    * @@TODO
* Project files for IDEs are provided.
    * @@TODO
* Source code repository is a revision control system.
    * @@TODO
* Structure of the source code repository and how this maps to the software’s components is documented.
    * @@TODO
* Source releases are snapshots of the repository.
    * @@TODO
* Source code is commented.
    * @@TODO
* Source code comments are written in an API document generation mark-up language e.g. JavaDoc or Doxygen.
    * @@TODO
* Source code is laid out and indented well.
    * @@TODO
* Source code uses sensible class, package and variable names.
    * @@TODO
* There are no old source code files that should be handled by version control e.g. “SomeComponentOld.java”.
    * @@TODO
* There is no commented out code.
    * @@TODO
* There are no TODOs in the code.
    * @@TODO
* Coding standards are required to be observed.
    * @@TODO
* Project-specific coding standards are consistent with community or generic coding standards (e.g. for C, Java, FORTRAN etc.).
    * @@TODO


**Changeability:**

How straightforward is it to modify the software to:
(a) Address issues?
(b) Modify functionality?
(c) Add new functionality?


* Project has defined a contributions policy.
    * @@TODO
* Contributions policy is publicly available.
    * @@TODO
* Contributors retain copyright/IP of their contributions.
    * @@TODO
* Users, user-developers and developers who are not project members can contribute.
    * @@TODO
* Project has defined a stability/deprecation policy for components, APIs etc.
    * @@TODO
* Stability/deprecation policy is publicly available.
    * @@TODO
* Releases document deprecated components/APIs in that release.
    * @@TODO
* Releases document removed/changed components/APIs in that release.
    * @@TODO
* Changes in the source code repository are e-mailed to a mailing list.
    * @@TODO
* This e-mailing list can be subscribed to by anyone.
    * @@TODO


**Evolvability:**

To what extent will the product be developed in the future:
(a) For a future release?
(b) Within a roadmap for the product?
￼￼

* Web site describes project roadmap or plans or milestones (either on a web page or within a ticketing system).
    * @@TODO
* Web site describes how project is funded/sustained.
    * @@TODO
* We site describes end dates of current funding lines.
    * @@TODO


**Interoperability:**

To what extent does the software’s interoperability:
(a) Meet appropriate open standards?
(b) Function with required third-party components?
(c) Function with optional third-party components?

* Uses open standards.
    * @@TODO
* Uses mature, ratified, non-draft open standards.
    * @@TODO
* Provides tests demonstrating compliance to open standards.
    * @@TODO


## Summary of evaluation for stability service

@@TODO: summary of reports and survey indications for component

